Data and code used for the paper "Interactions between global change stressors on submerged plants depend on null models, experiment conditions, and plant traits" which was authored by Jiangqiu Zhu, Peiyu Zhang, Sabine Hilt, Samuel J. Macaulay, Manqi Chang, Haowu Cheng, Min Zhang, and Jun Xu

Abstract

Submerged plants play key roles in shallow aquatic ecosystems, and are affected by multiple, simultaneously occurring global change stressors. However, understanding the interactive effects of these stressors remains challenging due to the influence of null model selection, experimental conditions (external factors), and plant traits (intrinsic factors). To test the impact of these moderators, we compiled 176 published full-factorial experiments with pairwise global change stressors on the growth of submerged plants, and applied three commonly used alternative null models (additive, multiplicative, and dominance) to capture the interactive effects of stressors. We qualitatively compared the interaction direction detected by different null models, and tested the effects of plant traits and experimental conditions on interactions. The consensus across all models was that the averaged interactive effect was additive. All three models consistently identified 26% of interactions as antagonistic, whereas the proportion of synergistic effects ranged from 13% to 15% depending on the model’s choice. For studies showing antagonistic effects, only 29.6% studies were identified by all three models, while for synergistic and additive effects, the figures were 51.4% and 58.1%, respectively. Experimental conditions and plant intrinsic traits did affect the stressor interactions. Experiments performed under high nutrient conditions, or without fish, or involving snails were more likely to exhibit antagonistic interactions. And experiments targeted on warm-tolerant species, eutrophic-sensitive species, and species with C3 photosynthetic strategy showed antagonistic effects. Presumed mechanisms for these moderating effects are the non-linear responses to stressors and the  co-tolerant response of stressors for organisms. Our results demonstrate that the interactive effects of global change stressors are highly context dependent, and no general interactive effects of stressors could be summarized from current studies. Future studies should try to investigate the interactive effects of stressors on submerged macrophytes in a more realistic environment and report the experimental conditions as detail as possible.

If you have any questions about the dataset or about reuse of the data, please contact Jiangqiu Zhu (zhujiangqiu24@mails.ucas.ac.cn)
